let's start shallow and then get deep
for me this is a reasonably profound
issue back when I lived in Cambodia Laos
and Thailand what I discovered to my
horror and it really was a long-term
enduring horror was that underage
prostitution child sex trafficking was
the easiest thing in the world for the
police to discover the reason what the
laws were not being enforced was simply
that people didn't want to know about it
and the authorities to a very large
extent in all three of those countries
were involved in aiding and abetting it
I was eventually employed in research
directly linked to this field so not
just the law enforcement but aids
prevention and like the charities that
try to provide education and a new
chance of life for people who were who
became prostitutes as children are very
young teenagers and then they move on to
other jobs later sooner or later they
emerge from their captivity or whatever
you want to call it I did formal
research on that and one stage in my
career in Cambodia and then informally
when I was actually a nonfiction editor
we had books and we had PhD level
research coming in that was editing to
be published in books related to all
that kind of stuff and one of the
simplest methods of finding the brothels
where they have underage prostitutes
simply to show up in any one of these
cities at the airport bus station train
station whenever they had flag a taxi
and ask a taxi driver and what these
researchers found this was dead serious
social science research basically
everywhere he went in the region all the
taxi drivers knew and they'd know
offhand look if you asked oh well at
this brothel what type of women do they
have at this Prout they would know what
the ages were what was on offer and what
wasn't because for the taxi drivers that
was a huge part of their business and if
if by chance one of the taxi drivers
didn't know
for some reason which there was not even
a single example of that in these
studies then of course they could tell
you oh ask this other taxi driver who's
older and who knows about that kind of
stuff I don't remember a single anecdote
in there of a taxi driver saying no I'm
a pious Buddhist I don't do that kind of
thing so there were a lot of advantages
to living in a society built on a very
permissive religion very permissive
cultural foundation like tera vaada
buddhism but there are disadvantages
also I would rather live in Thailand
than live in Saudi Arabia I assume the
amount of prostitution in Saudi Arabia
is a lot lower than Thailand but
whatever prostitution is there is
obviously very secret very tightly
controlled it's it's out of sight
but for sure I'm not claiming different
modes of authority all right so that's
the shallow end of the pool what our
Kelly's case illustrates is that this
stuff goes on it's created and sustained
through the willing ignorance and even
active participation of a relatively
large number of people and a lot of the
public outrage in recent weeks leading
up to the announcement that he'd
actually face charges that he's gone
into custody million dollars bail
leading up to that a lot of the outrage
was actually directed towards the
smaller figures people who were in an
assistance role so to speak around the
edges of this now for me the deeper
point I want to reflect on which is more
broadly applicable to a lot of questions
in life is actually about the utility of
short term prison sentences for the
earlier and less serious charges in a
person's life for really asking what
kind of a positive lesson can we draw
from our Kelly's life and trajectory the
terrible truth is the fact that he got
away with these crimes earlier on in
life is exactly what embolden him to do
it again and again and again as his life
went on now let's say hypothetically the
first time he came into this crime was
with the singer alia I have no reason to
think that perhaps he had other targets
before
or certainly another's after but let's
say hypothetically that was his first
experience so we know that there's
paperwork where he tried to legally
marry alia and where he apparently lied
on the paperwork about her age allegedly
what if he had just done six months in
prison for that what if he'd done six
months in prison for submitting false
pay for company application okay what if
he'd faced a relatively mild statutory
rape charge at that phase a lot of the
anger and anguish is focused at the end
of the process where Tiger man is fifty
years old and has like an unquantifiable
number of victims and people are saying
put him in jail you know for the rest of
his life execute him calling for really
extreme punishments I think the question
we all were really need to reflect on is
couldn't all of this harm have been
reduced the tragedy for some of his
victims the tragedy for him as a person
if he act if if the Department of
Corrections actually had a corrective
effect on him earlier on through
relatively small sentences for
relatively minor infractions and an
earlier phase Cambodia and South Africa
are both examples of societies where
tremendous atrocities were just swept
under the rug in the name of peace order
good governance and keeping business
rolling and you can see footage I've
seen this you can see footage of the
so-called Truth and Reconciliation
hearings in South Africa where you have
a black woman sitting down with a black
man who liked tortured and executed our
own son and today that black man is
still employed as a police officer or
maybe even a post office workers in some
kind of government employ and the point
is before in the bad old days he was one
of the people who worked for the white
establishment in apartheid South Africa
like all those regimes you know a large
part of the dirty work was not done by
white people was done by local local
black people employed by and following
orders from the white establishment and
and you know that mother is just
supposed to sit there and take it
they're supposed to have some kind of
pious Christian moment of acceptance and
forgiveness that this guy is is not even
gonna spend one day in jail that he has
impunity and then the flipside you scale
that up okay maybe this particular guy
maybe he does go on to be a law-abiding
citizen I doubt it like what's the
educational effect or process of getting
away with the crime because again it's
not just that our Kelly became a worse
person because he didn't go to prison he
became a worse and worse person because
he you know he kept being confronted
with the possibility of getting to
prison and then feeling that he was
better than the system the feeling he
was better than his accusers being
embolden and hardened and those in those
actions ultimately I think you could say
he developed a sense of entitlement
he felt entitled to break the law that's
something you know I see even and even
in people I know directly my personal
life you let them get away with this
little crime and they go on to commit to
many other crimes you create a little
culture of impunity even if it's a
culture on the small scale culture of
just a few people like a culture of our
Kelly and the 30 people around him who
are his enablers his helpers his
handlers his assistants so on and so
forth in Cambodia on a massive scale the
fact that there was no justice for
anyone and you know again words like
Truth and Reconciliation all these
really phony insincere you know well
this humanitarian jargon for the United
Nations was used to glorify the fact
that people who had committed atrocities
torture and murder beating people to
death confining people starving to death
but you know literally the employees of
the main torture chamber s21 right in
the middle of the capital city that
those people all just had impunity now I
think I think there were a lot of crimes
where we really have to look at the
corrective power of the state
say you know what maybe this person
shouldn't be locked up forever maybe
they shouldn't be locked up and throw
away the key maybe there really should
be the possibility of Correction with
the exception of people who are so poor
that they find prison conditions an
improvement over the quality of life
that exists still today there's a big
issue during the Great Depression there
were a lot of people were sent to prison
and said well quality of food and
shelter I have is better in prison then
what's inside of prison that's not such
ancient history and obviously in a third
world country like Cambodia
I've seen some Cambodian prisons that
were really terrified anyway it's
possible it's possible the prison
conditions are better so you can get
some inverse incentives that way any
middle-class person United States of
America any person who knows what it's
like to be able to do your own laundry
you know what I mean don't a washing
machine or this kind of thing um you
don't think six months in prison feels
like a long time doing I'm not saying
today our Kelly should have six Mis
point sure death penalty
whatever hundred years whatever I the
question of hashing is would it have
been possible for our Kelly to get in a
much better trajectory in life by
getting some kind of short corrective
sentence earlier in life so guys in
terms of my own politics I'm certainly
left-of-centre
if I were in America I'd be voting for
Bernie Sanders not Donald Trump however
I'm not left-wing I'm not far left and
to me I think one of the sickest thing
is that that left wing academia one of
the one of the one of the sickest
influences on mainstream culture coming
out of left wing academia is this idea
that the the controlling and coercive
nature of the state of government is
always a bad thing
just those words control and coercion no
it's not no it's not no it's not I don't
want to guess what percentage of men
like our Kelly really feel attracted to
sort of fourteen fifteen sixteen year
olds right that's a different category
of pedophile from the guy
- or chasing after eight-year-olds it is
you know the chasing obstacles are right
around the age of puberty it's it's a
different market you know again I've
seen the statistics you know when
countries like Thailand Laos and
Cambodia what where people have the
freedom to do that and get away with it
where there isn't the coercive power of
the state preventing that behavior would
you like to venture an estimate as to
how many men would live like our Kelly
if whatever that uh you know it's it's a
shame that we can't more effectively
educate people on how to cope with their
own sexuality whether that's straight or
gay whatever feelings you've got what's
oh yeah yeah yeah this may be innate in
you this preference I have no doubt I
mean you know our Kelly is born
different there's a lot of things
different about this guy
he remained illiterate quite late into
his adult life he may he may have really
serious learning disabilities he may in
some sense be mentally [ __ ] wouldn't
surprise me at all I don't think we're
gonna get a diagnosis coming out of
court maybe he will maybe won't say a
lot wrong with our Kelly um and he's in
a minority you know it's not the
majority of men that are after what he's
asked not by any stretch the imagination
um recognizing human nature for what it
is in all its diversity in all its
contradictions you know its darkness and
really providing people with an
education that says loud and clear there
are some things you want that you can
never have there are some things you
want you desire where it is your
absolute moral obligation to deny
yourself
that's very alien to American culture
right and ironically that's a big part
of what Buddhism as a religion is about
living in that kind of self-denial and
self-discipline and why is that you know
yeah ultimately it's for the greater
good
you know ultimately it's so that we can
have a society where fifteen-year-old
girls are safe going to McDonald's
unattended by a father or an uncle it's
so that those little girls can grow up
and become full-grown women without
carrying with them this bizarre memory
it was just her testimony you know of
losing their virginity with our Kelly
and so on it's you know there are a lot
of real knock-on consequences for how
society as a whole operates it's not for
any one simple reason that this is
ultimately stigmatized shamed and
punished with the long arm of the law
but the alternative is it's the same
with drug policy if you want to reduce
the number of people that are
encountering government persuasion at
the punitive end of things Corrections
prison then you've got to increase the
number of people who are getting the
message early on through education and
that is something in the United States
of America in the 21st century so far
nobody is really comfortable with doing